# Introduction

The symbiosis between coral hosts and algae of the family Symbiodiniaceae is highly sensitive to thermal stress. This tightly interwoven and often obligate symbiotic relationship makes it difficult to uncouple the host's stress response from that of their algal symbiont. Facultatively symbiotic corals living along the East Coast of the United States can exist in symbiotic (brown phenotype) and aposymbiotic (white phenotype) states across their distribution and offer a unique opportunity to uncouple this relationship. Here, we leveraged these naturally-occurring symbiotic states to investigate the role of symbiosis in coral host thermal tolerance. We conducted a common garden experiment and compared the responses of symbiotic and aposymbiotic fragments of two facultatively symbiotic coral species, *Astrangia poculata* and *Oculina arbuscula*,under both hot and cold thermal extremes. Fragments of each species were exposed to three temperature treatments: i) control (static 18°C), ii) heat stress (18 to 32°C ramp over 15 days), and iii) cold stress (18 to 6°C decrease over 15 days). We quantified responsiveness of corals to food stimuli daily and at the end of the experiment, when temperatures were most divergent, we sampled for genome-wide gene expression profiling to uncover the molecular signatures of the host's stress response. Behaviorally, both thermal extremes caused polyp retraction and corals appeared to enter quiescent-like states in which feeding ceased. We have successfully generated gene expression profiling data for (N = 48) *A. poculata* and (N = 47) *O. arbuscula*. While gene expression analyses are ongoing, we hypothesize that stress responses in symbiotic corals, at least under heat stress, will be stronger due to symbiotic hosts having to contend with reactive oxygen species produced by algal symbionts. By studying the effects of thermal extremes in a facultatively symbiotic coral and leveraging the power of gene expression profiling, this study will disentangle the role of symbiosis in the generalized stress response, which will transcend our understanding of symbiosis maintenance and bleaching in reef-building corals. 

# Methods

In summer 2018, 15 genotypes of Oculina arbuscula were collected from Radio Island, North Carolina and 20 genotypes of *Astrangia poculata* were collected from Woods Hole MA. Colonies were shipped to Boston University, fragmented, attached to petri dishes using cyanoacrylate glue, and placed in control conditions (18°C) for recovery. On November 1, 2018, corals were placed in their experimental treatments, including: 1) constant temperature (control, 18°C), 2) heat stress, and 3) cold stress. These experimental temperatures were informed partly by in situ temperature data recorded by the NOAA buoy data closest to the collection site (Station BFTN7; Figure 1B). Temperatures in the control treatment remained at 18℃ for the duration of the study. The heat stress treatment started at 18℃ and increased by 1℃ every evening for 15 days, with a final target temperature of 32℃ (Figure 2A). The cold stress treatment started at 18℃ and decreased by 1℃ every evening for 15 days, with a final target temperature of 4℃ (however only 6°C was achieved in the *O. arbuscula* experiment). In all three treatments, temperature was controlled using an Aqualogic Digital Temperature Controller. When possible, all coral genotypes were represented in all aquaria in both treatments and control and treatment tanks contained 14- 15 genotypes (6 white and 9-10 brown nubbins). Each temperature treatment consisted of three 15-gallon aquaria connected to one sump. All aquaria had a powerhead for water flow and circulation, and each sump was equipped with a filter sock and protein skimmer for water filtration.